# My todo list

- monitor disassembly is broken, pop # s/b 1 byte, sav takes 1 immediate byte
    - branches are wrong, still expecting 2 bytes
    - 
- a gofmt-equivalent would be nice
- monitor needs a way to view stack contents ... not sure how though unless we know whether they are bytes or words
- could I actually build a debugger that could inspect variables?
- Add include directive so I can start building reusable functions
- Is there a way to add unit tests?
- Need waaaay better error detection and recovery, right now an invalid symbol will hang forever
- Add 'Hlt' as opcode
- Some kind of character i/o would be fantastic
- Need to cleanup uint16 vs int everywhere, make up your mind

# System Monitor

Based on the old apple 2 design.

command params

d/dump [start [end]]
l/list [start]
set [address value [value]*]
run address
s/step [address]

mpu -m file.bin - load file and enter monitor

# Stack relative constants

Want a way to easily declare and use local vars, using stack relative mode.

- params
- return value
- local vars

Suppose I have a function that takes two values and returns their sum.

Stack: parm1, parm2, result, address, local1, local2, local3

Caller:
    psh parm1
    psh parm2
    psh #0
    jsr function
    pop result
    clc
    adc sp, 4 // discard input params

Callee:
    psh local1
    psh local2
    psh local3
    local3 = sp+2
    local2 = sp+4
    local1 = sp+6
    result = sp+10
    parm2 = sp+12
    parm1 = sp+14

I can go a little higher level and generate all the stack frame shit, but that obscures the actual opcodes.

func funcname(param1 dw, param2 dw):result dw
    var local1 dw
    var local2 dw
    var local3 dw

Can I just do local equates?

func:
.parm1 = 14
.parm2 = 12
.result = 10
.local1 = 6
.local2 = 4
.local3 = 2
    cpy [sp+parm1], #0

Here's a working example of this, and I *hate* it.  I just spent an hour trying to debug it, I had the offsets wrong because I was manipulating the stack.

Also, I can't use the stack once these offsets are set.  I should be using a frame pointer rather than stack pointer .. which I kinda knew but plowed ahead.  

So two problems ... I need a frame pointer, and easy way to set it up and restore it.  And, I need a better damn syntax than [sp+temp], [sp+a] because that shits unreadable.  Ideally I'd like to put them in a declaration somehow, let the assembler calculate all the fucking offsets, an I can just write some code.

```
// Compute the remainder of the two args on the stack.
//  sp+2 temp
//  sp+4 return address
//  sp+6 b
//  sp+8 a
//  sp+10 result
//     a - (a / b * b)
// func remainder(out result word, a word, b word)
remainder:
    .temp = 2
    .b  = 6
    .a  = 8
    .result = 10

    sec
    sub 0x02, #2
    cpy [sp+temp], [sp+a]               // temp = a
    div [sp+temp], [sp+b]               // temp /= b
    mul [sp+temp], [sp+b]               // temp *= b
    cpy [sp+result], [sp+a]             // result = a
    sec
    sub [sp+result], [sp+temp]
    clc
    add 0x02, #2 // discard temp
    ret
```

Let me try some things:

```
// Compute the remainder of the two args on the stack.
//     a - (a / b * b)
remainder(result word, a word, b word):
    .temp local word

    // copy sp to fp, save fp, make space for locals
    sav #2

    cpy temp, a               // temp = a
    div temp, b               // temp /= b
    mul temp, b               // temp *= b
    cpy result, a             // result = a
    sec
    sub result, temp          // result -= temp

    // discard locals from stack, restore fp, ret
    rst
```

In the above, the assembler would define the symbols to be local to 'remainder', and define them as fp relative offsets.  The defining the symbols is easy ... but I'll have to do something in the parser or linker to override the explicit mode (which looks like absolute).

Is it confusing that it looks like absolute addressing, but is actually fp relative?  I don't think so ... its easy to see that the symbols being referred to are stack based.

sav/rst could be auto-generated by the assembler.  Ie if there are params or local definitions, generate the sav as the first instruction, and replace 'ret' with 'rst'.

// Compute the remainder of the two args on the stack.
//     a - (a / b * b)
remainder(result word, a word, b word):
    .temp local word

    cpy temp, a               // temp = a
    div temp, b               // temp /= b
    mul temp, b               // temp *= b
    cpy result, a             // result = a
    sec
    sub result, temp          // result -= temp
    ret

As soon as we process any statement that isn't a local decl, we can finalize all their offsets.  It can be invalid to declare a local once any instructions are generated, if that helps.  Other labels are not statements, but in this case it generates a SAV instruction.  I could use the Statement to buffer up the labels.  Actually ... I need to do that to have the SAV in there.  Will have to add some junk to the Statement object to buffer this up.  Then the symbol definition part.

Devil's advocate ... what if the callee is responsible for removing params from the stack, being careful to save the return address, and pushing the result?  The caller pushes parameters, calls the sub, then pops any result off the stack.  The work on the caller side is to save the return address somewhere (I can designate some address range as function locals), pop the args off, push the result, push the return address.  Or, just copy the saved return address to the pc.

remainder:
    .pc = 0x0000
    .returnAddress = 50
    .temp = 52
    .a = 54
    .b = 56
    .result = 58

    pop returnAddress
    pop b
    pop a
    cpy temp, a               // temp = a
    div temp, b               // temp /= b
    mul temp, b               // temp *= b
    cpy result, a             // result = a
    sec
    sub result, temp          // result -= temp
    psh result
    cpy pc, returnAddress     // return

Sure, its 'doable', but it ain't *maintainable*.  I spent an hour debugging this simple function yesterday because I kept mislabeling the stack offsets.  

# Memory Machine

What if instead of an anemic 6502 register machine, I make one with no registers but that has a rich set of operators against memory?  All arithmetic and comparison instructions can be done on memory.  The program counter and stack pointer are located in memory.

opcode op1 [,op2]

op1 can be:
    constant
    memory
    *memory
op2 can be:
    constant
    memory
    *memory
    
addw ox, -24 ' ox = ox - 24

## Opcodes

Arithmetic:

* add: a += b
* sub: a -= b 
* mul: a *= b
* div: a /= b
* cmp: a - b

Logical:
* and: a &= b
* or:  a |= b
* xor: a ^= b

Assignment:
* cpy: a = b
* psh: [sp++] = a
* pop: a = [--sp]

Flow Control:
* jmp
* jeq
* jne
* jge
* jlt

# Addressing Modes

* Immediate: the value is copied directly

Ex:
    mov a, #27

* Absolute: the target is a memory address

    mov a, b

* Indirect: the target is pointed to by a memory address

    mov *a, *b

3 modes, 20+ instructions, possibly 2 widths (byte vs word).

none
imm
abs/abs
abs/imm
abs/ind
ind/abs
ind/imm
ind/ind

I can eliminate a few instructions by using memory to expose cpu "registers".  Ie, program counter, carry status, stack pointer, would all map to addresses.

That reduces the instruction set to 16, leaving us one extra bit for byte/word size.

Encoding:

    MMMSIIII
        M = Addressing mode
        S = Word size
        I = Instruction opcode

I'm wishing now I had a stack-relative addressing mode for local vars, and a jsr/ret instruction.  Maybe I need to give up a single-byte encoding ... I don't need a 64k limit?  Oh ... yes I do.  I have 16 bit modes.

Also ... if I use a lookup table I could use all 256 available instructions/modes.

What I'm actually using right now:

* 5 - 5 jump instructions using immediate mode
* 45 - 9 binop instructions where arg1 can be abs or ind, and arg2 can be abs, ind, or immed (6 variations each)
* 3 - psh imm, ind, abs
* 2 - pop ind, abs

That's only 55 instructions.  If I add the byte variation that's still only 110.  I can add another hundred ... but not if I use reserved bits for all this.

Not every instruction supports byte mode.  An immediate mode byte should take only 1 byte of memory.  10 instructions can operate on bytes.

Can I encode zero page addresses as a single byte?  Ugh.  That would be special opcodes.  Maybe worth it for the most common ones like add/sub/cpy.

Hang on ... indirect is a modifier of abs/rel.  I would want relative, absolute, relative indirect, absolute indirect, immediate.

Another option for handling different word sizes is to make that a mode, ie a set/clear word mode.  Based on the current mode it would operate on bytes vs words.  That frees up a lot more room for additional addressing modes or new instructions.

Is it reasonable to require indirect via a local var?  Seems ok?  Then I could restrict the modes to:

* Immediate (imm)
* Absolute (abs)
* Indirect (ind)
* SP Relative (spr)
* SP Relative Indirect (spri)

abs, imm
abs, abs
abs, ind
abs, spr
abs, spri
ind, imm
ind, abs
ind, ind
ind, spr
ind, spri
spr, imm
spr, abs
spr, ind
spr, spr
spr, spri
spri, imm
spri, abs
spri, ind
spri, spr
spri, spri

The main 8 instructions.

add
sub
mul
div
and
or
xor
cpy

Push supports all modes including immediate (so 5).

psh

Pop supports everything but immediate (so 4).

pop

These are just immediate. 7x1 = 7

jmp
jeq
jne
jge
jlt
jsr

Possible chopping block:
    * clc
    * sec
    * jcs
    * jcc

How about this wacky encoding idea ... opcode opmode operands
    - opcode is the 1 byte instruction (so up to 256 instructions)
    - opmode describes up to two params by address mode (so up to 16 modes!)
        - could have zero page modes
        - single byte vs word immediate mode

Don't need an instruction lookup table.  Can parse operands totally separate from decoding the instruction.


# Assembler Directives

## Symbols & Local Symbols

Symbols are declared and equate to the current offset, unless defined by an equate.

symbol

Local labels are prefixed with '.' and are scoped to the previous symbol.

foo:
.l1
.l2

bar:
.l1
.l2

currently I have bar.l1 defined ... resolving symbols however is only looking for 'l1'.  Maybe I should have it search first for bar.l1, then .l1?  Yes.  What do I need to make that work ... need to know the current global label in scope for each statement.

## Define space

    .ds <count>[, pattern]
    .db number[, number] | string
    .dw word
    .eq

## Constants

symbol = expression

## Expressions

* Numeric
* String
* Bytes

Example:

```asm
    DrawBlock
        var bloc_index ' sp + #0
        var temp       ' sp + #4

        cpy mult, #1
        cpy ox, x
        cpy oy, y
        cpy i, #1
        
    loop:
        cmp i, #14
        bgt done

        mov bloc_index, temp_piece
        mul bloc_index, #4
        add bloc_index, temp_rot
        and bloc + bloc_index, mult
        bne end

        psh ox
        psh oy
        mov temp, ox
        add temp, #6
        psh temp
        mov temp, oy
        add temp, #6
        psh temp
        psh #1
        mov temp, temp_piece
        add temp, #1
        psh temp
        call Display.DrawRect

    notit:
        cmp i, #4
        beq gotit
        cmp i, #8
        beq gotit
        cmp i, #12
        bne else
    gotit:
        add ox, #-24
        add oy, #8
        bra endif
    else:
        add ox, #8
    endif:

        mul mult, 2
        add i, #1
        bra loop
    done:
        ret
```

This might be fun to envision as an Apple 2 type of machine?

* 16 bit address space
* Instructions can operate on bytes or words
* DMA hardware for display, file i/o, network, etc

It has a simple instruction set and addressing modes, but with all the operands being 16 bit addresses ... the instructions will require 1 byte for the opcode, and up to 4 bytes for operands.  Zero page on 6502 was precious just because you could save a byte. Meh, what the hell.

Do I make a ROM that bootstraps your program?  Nah.  I think the program specifies its own load address.  The assembler creates an object file that represents the 64kb of memory at startup, like a ROM ... and that's what it runs.  Maybe you need to include something at org $fff0 that is a jump to your actual entry point.

label: \n    - Associates label to current PC
.label \n (local label associated to most recent global label)

label: word arg[,arg]*
word arg[,arg]*

ident = expr
ident:

if we parse a '.', its a local label
if we get ident, peek to see if there's a '=' or ':'
    a ':' defines a global label
    a '=' defines an equate
    if neither in peekahead, it must be a opcode or directive

line :=
        label
    |   label statement
    |   statement

label := 
        ident 
    |   .ident

statement :=
        ident arg[,arg]*

Operand  :=
      '#' expr
    | '*' expr
    | expr

expr :=
    MulExpr [ ('+' | '-' | '|' | '^') MulExpr]*

MulExpr :=
    UnaryExpr ['*' | '/' | '%' | '<<' | '>>'  UnaryExpr]*

UnaryExpr :=
    ['+' | '-'] PrimaryExpr

PrimaryExpr :=
      '(' expr ')'
    | Identifier
    | Literal (int, String, Char)

expressions have a type which ends up being basically integer or []byte.

I need to build the AST tree for expressions, how to model that.

The type can be: literal (string, int), symbol, unary (+/-) expr, or binary op expr.

type Operand struct {
    mode (immediate, indirect, absolute)
    expr
}

type Expr interface {
    computeType() -> integer, []byte
}

type ExprLiteral struct {

}

type ExprSymbol struct {
    symbol
}

type ExprUnary struct {
    op
    expr
}

type ExprBinary struct {
    op
    expr1
    expr2
}